Три эпизода, рассказанные нами в «картинках», показывают, как важно не делать поспешных выводов о причине и следствии, когда речь идет о статистической закономерности. Вот еще несколько примеров.

1. Нередко приходится слышать, будто большинство дорожно-транспортных происшествий приходится на начальный отрезок пути, едва автомобилист успевает отъехать от дома. Означает ли это, что езда по скоростному шоссе за много километров от дома безопаснее, чем езда по родному городу?

Разумеется, не означает. Статистика просто отражает тот факт, что близкие поездки автомобилисту приходится совершать чаще, чем дальние.

2. Как показали исследования, в некоторых штатах наблюдается высокий процент людей, пьющих молоко, и высокий уровень смертности от рака. Означает ли это, что молоко вызывает рак?

Нет. В этих штатах высок процент людей пожилого возраста, а поскольку раковые заболевания обычно удел престарелых людей, более высокий уровень смертности от рака связан с тем, что старшая возрастная группа составляет значительную долю населения.

3. Как показали исследования, в некотором городе отмечено резкое увеличение количества смертей от сердечной недостаточности и потребления пива.

Может ли потребление пива увеличивать вероятность сердечного приступа? Нет, увеличение обоих показателей вызвано быстрым ростом численности населения этого города. Причиной повышения вероятности можно считать возросшее потребление кофе, жевательной резинки, увеличение доли населения, играющего в бридж, смотрящего многочасовые телепередачи и т. п.

4. Как показали исследования, в одном европейском городе отмечено резкое увеличение численности населения и аистов, гнездящихся в черте города.

Можно ли считать это подтверждением распространенного поверья, будто аисты приносят младенцев?

Нет, нельзя. Отмеченный параллелизм в росте численности населения и аистов обусловлен тем, что с увеличением числа зданий в городе появляется больше мест, пригодных для гнездовий аиста.

5. Как показало недавно проведенное исследование, большинство математиков были старшими сыновьями. Означает ли это, что существует большая вероятность обнаружить математические способности у старшего сына, чем у кого-нибудь из младших? Нет, статистика просто отражает тот удивительный факт, что большинство сыновей старшие.

В связи с последним примером вы можете провести несколько интересных опытов. Вспомните знакомых мужского пола. Проверьте, будет ли больше половины из них старшими сыновьями. Повторите тот же эксперимент со знакомыми женского пола. Какая доля из них будет старшими дочерьми?

Проведем мысленный эксперимент. Рассмотрим 100 двухдетных семей. Какая доля мальчиков (девочек) будет старшими сыновьями (дочерями)? (Ответ: 3/4.) Вычислите долю старших сыновей (дочерей) в 100 трехдетных семьях. (Ответ: 7/12.) Вряд ли нужно говорить о том, что в однодетных семьях единственный ребенок всегда старший.

Точная доля старших сыновей или дочерей изменяется в зависимости от числа детей в семьях, но всегда больше 1/2 и в большинстве случаев значительно больше 1/2.

Приведенных примеров достаточно, чтобы побудить вас к самостоятельному поиску других примеров статистических утверждений, которым неправильно приписывается несуществующая причинно-следственная связь. Богатым источником такого рода утверждений служит коммерческая реклама, в особенности передаваемая по телевидению.

"No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will
look upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual
problem. And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon
Christmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I
have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Peterson's
fire. The facts are these: about four o'clock on Christmas
morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is a very honest fellow, was
returning from some small jollification and was making his way
homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he saw, in
the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, and
carrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached the
corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger
and a little knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the
man's hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and,
swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window behind him.
Peterson had rushed forward to protect the stranger from his
assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, and
seeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him,
dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the
labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham
Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the appearance of
Peterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of
battle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of this
battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose."

"Which surely he restored to their owner?"

"My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that 'For
Mrs. Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which was tied to
the bird's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H.
B.' are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are
some thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in
this city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property to any
one of them."

"What, then, did Peterson do?"

"He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning,
knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me.
The goose we retained until this morning, when there were signs
that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it
should be eaten without unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried
it off, therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose,
while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who
lost his Christmas dinner."

"Did he not advertise?"

"No."

"Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"

"Only as much as we can deduce."

"From his hat?"

"Precisely."

"But you are joking. What can you gather from this old battered
felt?"

"Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather
yourself as to the individuality of the man who has worn this
article?"

I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather
ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round
shape, hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of
red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker's
name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H. B." were
scrawled upon one side. It was pierced in the brim for a
hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. For the rest, it was
cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places,
although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide the
discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.

"I can see nothing," said I, handing it back to my friend.

"On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail,
however, to reason from what you see. You are too timid in
drawing your inferences."

"Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?"

He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective
fashion which was characteristic of him. "It is perhaps less
suggestive than it might have been," he remarked, "and yet there
are a few inferences which are very distinct, and a few others
which represent at least a strong balance of probability. That
the man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon the
face of it, and also that he was fairly well-to-do within the
last three years, although he has now fallen upon evil days. He
had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointing to a
moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of his
fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink,
at work upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that
his wife has ceased to love him."